Configurable logging docs (#14063)
kyma-project/kyma: docs/01-overview/main-areas/observability/obsv-04-telemetry-in-kyma.md

---

> title: Telemetry (beta)

Author: ```suggestion
title: Telemetry (alpha)
```

---

## Kyma's telemetry component

The focus of Kyma's observability functionality is the pre-integrated collection of telemetry data from the users' workloads, and making that data available for further analysis and storage in backends of any kind and location. The telemetry component provides the configurable collection and shipment components, and with that, separates them explicitly from the storage and analysis in a specific backend system. Lightweight in-cluster backends can be installed with dedicated observability components.

> For now, the telemetry component supports the logging domain only. You get a log collector (Fluent Bit) and you can configure the log shipment with external systems using runtime configuration with a dedicated Kubernetes API (CRD). With that, for example, you can integrate with vendors like [VMWare](https://medium.com/@shrishs/log-forwarding-from-fluent-bit-to-vrealizeloginsightcloud-9eeb14b40276) using generic outputs, or with any vendor via a [fluentd integration](https://medium.com/hepsiburadatech/fluent-logging-architecture-fluent-bit-fluentd-elasticsearch-ca4a898e28aa) using the forward output. Kyma's optional `logging` component complements the telemetry component, providing `Loki` as pre-configured log backend.

Author: Our [guidelines](https://kyma-project.io/community/guidelines/content-guidelines/02-style-and-terminology/#terminology) don't like phrasing it this way...

<img width="753" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/76950046/179961605-388230fe-b500-457e-86d9-12b36adbfab8.png">

Reviewer: What do you suggest

Author: How about this:

> To support the logging domain, the telemetry component provides a log collector, Fluent Bit. You can configure the log shipment with external systems using runtime configuration with a dedicated Kubernetes API (CRD). With that, for example, you can integrate with vendors like...

The telemetry component is in an alpha state and needs an [explicit installation](./../../../04-operation-guides/operations/obsv-00-enable-configurable-logging.md).

## Architecture

### Telemetry component

The telemetry component ships [Fluent Bit](https://fluentbit.io/) as a log collector. It is responsible for collecting all application logs of the cluster workload reliably and shipping them to a backend.

The only prerequisite in your application is to log to `stdout` or `stderr`.

![Telemetry Architecture](./assets/telemetry-logging-arch.drawio.svg)

> 1. Container logs are stored by Kubernetes container runtime under the `var/log` directory and its subdirectories.

Author: in the image, this directory is called `var/logs`. Which variant is correct?

Reviewer: fixed

> 2. The collector runs as a Daemon Set (one instance per node), detects any new log files in the folder, and tails them using a filesystem buffer for reliability.

Author: "the collector" means "Fluent Bit", right? Because we name it explicitly in line 26. We should choose one consistent term.

![Flow](./assets/telemetry-logging-flow.drawio.svg)

Learn more about these attributes in the following sections.

### Container log message

In the example, we assume there's a container `myContainer` of Pod `myPod` running in Namespace `myNamespace` logging to `stdout` with the following log message in JSON format:

```json
{
  "level": "warn",
  "message": "This is the actual message",
  "tenant": "myTenant",
  "traceID": "123"
}
```

### Tail input

The central pipeline tails the log message from a log file managed by the container runtime. The file name contains the Namespace, Pod, and container information that will be available later as part of the [tag](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/concepts/key-concepts#tag). The resulting log record available in an internal Fluent Bit representation looks similar to the following example:

```json
{
  "time": "2022-05-23T15:04:52.193317532Z",
  "stream": "stdout",
  "_p": "F",
  "log": "{\"level\": \"warn\",\"message\": \"This is the actual message\",\"tenant\": \"myTenant\",\"traceID\": \"123\"}
}
```

The attributes in the example have the following meaning:

> | Attribute | Description |

Author: This table isn't rendered properly :/

![Uploading image.png…]()

> | Attribute | Description |

Author: This table isn't rendered properly :/

<img width="747" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/76950046/179966193-cb8a4f76-55bb-45c9-aec3-0cea5e9d07b1.png">

Author: It's less bad now! Although I didn't know THIS is possible 🤣 

<img width="567" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/76950046/180188068-222d2827-73e3-412d-94cf-725ce16cce1b.png">

Reviewer: fixed

4. The telemetry component configures Fluent Bit with your custom output configuration.
5. If Kyma's `logging` component is installed, the operator configures the shipment to the in-cluster Loki instance automatically.
6. As specified in your custom configuration, Fluent Bit sends the log data to observability systems outside the Kyma cluster.
7. The user accesses the internal and external observability system to analyze and vizualize the logs.

### Pipelines

Fluent Bit comes with a pipeline concept, which supports flexible combination of inputs with outputs and filtering in between - for details, see [Fluent Bit: Output](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/concepts/data-pipeline/output).
Kyma's telemetry component brings a predefined setup of the Fluent Bit DaemonSet and a base configuration, which assures that the application logs of the workloads in the cluster are processed reliably and efficiently. Additionally, the telemetry component provides a Kubernetes API called `LogPipeline` to configure outputs with some filtering capabilities.

![Pipeline Concept](./assets/telemetry-logging-pipelines.drawio.svg)

1. A central `tail` input plugin reads the application logs.

> 2. The application logs are enriched by a `kubernetes` filter. Then, for every `LogPipeline` definition, a `rewrite_tag` filter is generated, which uses a dedicated `tag` with name `<logpipeline>.*`, followed by the custom configuration defined in the `LogPipeline` resource. You can add your own filters to the default filters.

Author: ```suggestion
2. The application logs are enriched by a `kubernetes` filter. Then, for every LogPipeline definition, a `rewrite_tag` filter is generated, which uses a dedicated `tag` with name `<logpipeline>.*`, followed by the custom configuration defined in the LogPipeline resource. You can add your own filters to the default filters.
```
Backticks are only needed when referring to code. I think here we refer to the resource name?

## Set up the LogPipeline

### Step 1: Create a LogPipeline

1. To ship application logs to a new output, create a resource file of kind LogPipeline:

   ```yaml
   kind: LogPipeline
   apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
   metadata:
     name: http-backend
   spec:
     output:
       custom: |
         Name               http
         Host               https://myhost/logs
         Tls                On
   
   ```

   An output is a data destination that can be configured by a [Fluent Bit output](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/outputs) of the relevant type. Here, the used output type is `http`, which is configured with the relevant parameters.

2. To create the instance, apply the resource file in your cluster.

   ```bash
   kubectl apply -f path/to/my-log-pipeline.yaml
   ```

> 3. Check that the status of the pipeline in your cluster is `Ready`:

Author: When do we say "pipeline" generically, and when "LogPipeline" as Kubernetes resource? 
Or is it all the same? In that case, we should consistently just one term.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Check that the status of the LogPipeline in your cluster is `Ready`:
```

        Record  cluster_identifier ${KUBERNETES_SERVICE_HOST}
  output:
    ...
```

In the example, three filters are added, which are executed in sequence. Different types of [Fluent Bit filter](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/concepts/data-pipeline/filter) are supported. The example uses the [grep](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/filters/grep) and the [record_modifier](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/filters/record-modifier) filter.

- The first filter keeps all log records that have the `kubernetes.labels.app` attribute set with value `my-deployment`; all other logs are discarded. The `kubernetes` attribute is available for every log record. See [here](#kubernetes-filter-metadata) for more details.
- The second filter drops all log records fulfilling the given rule. Here, typical Namespaces are dropped based on the `kubernetes` attribute.
- A log record is modified by adding a new attribute. Here, a constant attribute is added to every log record for recording the actual cluster node name at the record for later filtering in the backend system. As value, a placeholder is used referring to a Kubernetes-specific environment variable.

> ### Step 3: Add authentication details from secrets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 3: Add authentication details from Secrets
```

> Integrations into external systems usually need authentication details dealing with sensitive data. To handle that data properly in secrets, the `LogPipeline` supports the reference of Secrets. The key-value entries of the Secrets can be mapped to environment variables of the Fluent Bit Pods, and with that, are available for usage in [placeholder expressions](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/administration/configuring-fluent-bit/classic-mode/variables).

Author: Is the first "secret" here unrelated to Kubernetes resources and that's why it's not [capitalized](https://kyma-project.io/community/guidelines/content-guidelines/02-style-and-terminology#capitalized-terms)?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Integrations into external systems usually need authentication details dealing with sensitive data. To handle that data properly in Secrets, the `LogPipeline` supports the reference of Secrets. The key-value entries of the Secrets can be mapped to environment variables of the Fluent Bit Pods, and with that, are available for usage in [placeholder expressions](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/administration/configuring-fluent-bit/classic-mode/variables).
```

To leverage data provided by a Kubernetes Secrets in a custom output definition, use placeholder expressions for the data provided by the Secret and then specify the actual mapping to the keys of the Secret in the `variables` section, like in:

```yaml
kind: LogPipeline
apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
metadata:
  name: http-backend
spec:
  filters:
  ...
  output:
    custom: |
      Name               http
      Host               ${ENDPOINT} # Defined in Secret
      HTTP_User          ${USER} # Defined in Secret
      HTTP_Password      ${PASSWORD} # Defined in Secret
      Tls                On
  variables:
    - name: ENDPOINT
      valueFrom:
        secretKeyRef:
        - name: http-backend-credentials
          namespace: default
          key: ENDPOINT
    ...
```

The related secret need to fullfil the referenced name and namespace and need to contain the mapped key as in:

```yaml
kind: Secret
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  name: http-backend-credentials
stringData:
  HTTP_ENDPOINT: https://myhost/logs
  HTTP_USER: myUser
  HTTP_PASSWORD: XXX
```

> ### Step 4: Rotate the secret

Author: Is "secret" here unrelated to Kubernetes resources and that's why it's not [capitalized](https://kyma-project.io/community/guidelines/content-guidelines/02-style-and-terminology#capitalized-terms)?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 4: Rotate the Secret
```

> A Secret being referenced with the `secretKeyRef` construct as used in the previous can be rotated manually or automatically. For automatic rotation, update the actual secret values and keep the keys stable.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Secret being referenced with the `secretKeyRef` construct as used in the previous can be rotated manually or automatically. For automatic rotation, update the actual values of the Secret and keep the keys of the Secret stable.  
```

> Once an hour, the LogPipeline watches the referenced secrets and detects changes to them. To enforce the detection, just annotate the LogPipeline; for example, with the following code:

Author: Is "secret" here unrelated to Kubernetes resources and that's why it's not [capitalized](https://kyma-project.io/community/guidelines/content-guidelines/02-style-and-terminology#capitalized-terms)?

  outputs:
    ...
```

Instead of defining a filter, you can [annotate](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/filters/kubernetes#kubernetes-annotations) your workload in the following way. Here, the parser is activated only for the annotated workload.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: dummy
  annotations:
    fluentbit.io/parser: dummy_test
spec:
```

## LogPipeline.spec attribute

For details, see the [LogPipeline specification file](https://github.com/kyma-project/kyma/blob/main/components/telemetry-operator/api/v1alpha1/logpipeline_types.go).

| Parameter | Type | Description |
|-|-|-|
| filters | []object | A list of [Fluent Bit filters](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/filters) to apply to the logs processed by the pipeline. Filters are executed in sequence as defined. They are executed before logs are buffered, and with that, will not be executed on retries.|
| filters[].custom | string | The actual filter definition in the syntax of Fluent Bit.|
| output | object | A [Fluent Bit outputs](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/outputs).|
| output.custom | string | The actual output definition in the syntax of Fluent Bit.|

> | variables | | []object | A list of mappings from Kubernetes secret keys to environment variables. Mapped keys are mounted as environment variables, so that they are available as [Variables](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/administration/configuring-fluent-bit/classic-mode/variables) in the sections.|

Author: ```suggestion
| variables | | []object | A list of mappings from Kubernetes Secret keys to environment variables. Mapped keys are mounted as environment variables, so that they are available as [Variables](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/administration/configuring-fluent-bit/classic-mode/variables) in the sections.|
```
Is "Secret" related to Kubernetes resources must be [capitalized](https://kyma-project.io/community/guidelines/content-guidelines/02-style-and-terminology#capitalized-terms).

| variables[].name | string | Name of the variable to map. |

> | variables[].valueFrom.secretKeyRef | object | Reference to a key in a secret. `name` and `namespace` of the secret as well as the name of the `key` needs to be provided |

Author: ```suggestion
| variables[].valueFrom.secretKeyRef | object | Reference to a key in a secret. `name` and `namespace` of the secret, as well as the name of the `key`, must be provided |
```
Is "secret" here unrelated to Kubernetes resources and that's why it's not [capitalized](https://kyma-project.io/community/guidelines/content-guidelines/02-style-and-terminology#capitalized-terms)?

  "_p": "F",
  "log": "{\"level\": \"warn\",\"message\": \"This is the actual message\",\"tenant\": \"myTenant\",\"traceID\": \"123\"}",
  "kubernetes": {...},
  "level": "warn",
  "message": "This is the actual message",
  "tenant": "myTenant",
  "traceID": "123"
}
```

### Rewrite tag

As per `LogPipeline` definition, a dedicated [rewrite_tag](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/filters/rewrite-tag) filter is introduced. The filter brings a dedicated filesystem buffer for the outputs defined in the related pipeline, and with that, ensures a shipment of the logs isolated from outputs of other pipelines. As a consequence, each pipeline runs on its own [tag](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/concepts/key-concepts#tag).

## Limitations

Currently there are the following limitations for LogPipelines that are served by Fluent Bit:

### Fluent Bit plugins

You cannot enable the following plugins, because they potentially harm the stability:

- Multiline Filter
- Kubernetes Filter
- Rewrite_Tag Filter

### Buffer limits

Fluent Bit buffers up to 1 GB of logs if a configured output cannot receive logs. The oldest logs are dropped when the limit is reached.

### Throughput

> Each Fluent Bit Pod can process up to 10 MB/s of logs for a single log pipeline. With multiple pipelines, the throughput per pipeline is reduced. The used logging backend or performance characteristics of the output plugin might limit the throughput earlier.

Author: ```suggestion
Each Fluent Bit Pod can process up to 10 MB/s of logs for a single LogPipeline. With multiple pipelines, the throughput per pipeline is reduced. The used logging backend or performance characteristics of the output plugin might limit the throughput earlier.
```
If it's the Kubernetes resource, we use CamelCase. Otherwise, keep natural language.

### Max amount of pipelines - CPU/Mem constraints

> Not more than 5 log pipelines when using the production profile, or 3 with the evaluation profile.

Author: ```suggestion
In the production profile, no more than 5 LogPipelines. 
In the evaluation profile, no more than 3 LogPipelines.
```

3. Based on the default and custom filters, you get the desired output for each `LogPipeline`.

This approach assures a reliable buffer management and isolation of pipelines, while keeping flexibility on customizations.

### Telemetry Operator

The LogPipeline resource is managed by the `Telemetry Operator`, a typical Kubernetes operator responsible for managing the custom parts of the Fluent Bit configuration.

![Operator resources](./assets/telemetry-operator-resources.drawio.svg)

The `Telemetry Operator` watches all LogPipeline resources and related Secrets. Whenever the configuration changes, it validates the configuration (with a [validating webhook](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/extensible-admission-controllers/)) and generates a new configuration for the Fluent Bit DaemonSet, where several ConfigMaps for the different aspects of the configuration are generated. Furthermore, referenced Secrets are copied into one Secret that is mounted to the DaemonSet as well.

## Set up the LogPipeline

### Step 1: Create a LogPipeline

> 1. To ship application logs to a new output, create a resource file of kind LogPipeline:

Reviewer: Will not fix it :)

      HTTP_Password      ${PASSWORD} # Defined in Secret
      Tls                On
  variables:
    - name: ENDPOINT
      valueFrom:
        secretKeyRef:
        - name: http-backend-credentials
          namespace: default
          key: ENDPOINT
    ...
```

The related Secret must fulfill the referenced name and Namespace, and contain the mapped key as in the following example:

```yaml
kind: Secret
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  name: http-backend-credentials
stringData:
  HTTP_ENDPOINT: https://myhost/logs
  HTTP_USER: myUser
  HTTP_PASSWORD: XXX
```

### Step 4: Rotate the Secret

A Secret being referenced with the `secretKeyRef` construct as used in the previous can be rotated manually or automatically. For automatic rotation, update the actual values of the Secret and keep the keys of the Secret stable.  
Once an hour, the LogPipeline watches the referenced Secrets and detects changes to them. To enforce the detection, just annotate the LogPipeline; for example, with the following code:

```yaml
kind: LogPipeline
apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
metadata:
  name: http-backend
  annotations:
    kyma-project.com/timeStamp: <current-time>
```

> ### Step 5: Add a parser

Reviewer 2: The whole Step 5 renders as one paragraph, and I guess you want three separate ones, correct?
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/62639546/180416494-ca0ea441-07ff-4301-8420-aa2d07b15d3f.png)

Reviewer: Indeed it was meant to be one paragraph

Typically, you want to have your logs shipped in a structured format already, so that a backend like OpenSearch can immediately index the content according to the log attributes.

> By default, a LogPipeline will try to parse all logs as JSON document and enrich the record with the parsed attributes on the root record. Thus, logging in JSON format in the application results in structured log records.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, a LogPipeline tries to parse all logs as a JSON document and enrich the record with the parsed attributes on the root record. Thus, logging in JSON format in the application results in structured log records.
```

Sometimes, logging in JSON is not an option (the log configuration is not under your control) and the logs are in an unstructured or plain format. To adjust this, you can define your custom [parser](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/concepts/data-pipeline/parser) and either activate it with a filter or a Pod annotation.

The following example defines a parser named `dummy_test` using a dedicated `LogParser` resource type:

```yaml
kind: LogParser
apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
metadata:
  name: dummy_test
spec:
  parser:
    content: |
      Format regex
      Regex ^(?<INT>[^ ]+) (?<FLOAT>[^ ]+) (?<BOOL>[^ ]+) (?<STRING>.+)$
```

> The parser is referenced by name in a filter of the pipeline and is activated for all logs of the pipeline.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The parser is referenced by its name in a filter of the pipeline and is activated for all logs of the pipeline.
```

```yaml
kind: LogPipeline
apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
metadata:
  name: http-backend
spec:
  filters:
    - custom: |
        Name parser
        Parser dummy_test
  outputs:
    ...
```

Instead of defining a filter, you can [annotate](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/filters/kubernetes#kubernetes-annotations) your workload in the following way. Here, the parser is activated only for the annotated workload.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: dummy
  annotations:
    fluentbit.io/parser: dummy_test
spec:
```

## Parameters

### LogPipeline.spec attribute

For details, see the [LogPipeline specification file](https://github.com/kyma-project/kyma/blob/main/components/telemetry-operator/apis/telemetry/v1alpha1/logpipeline_types.go).

| Parameter | Type | Description |
|-|-|-|

> | filters | []object | A list of [Fluent Bit filters](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/filters) to apply to the logs processed by the pipeline. Filters are executed in sequence as defined. They are executed before logs are buffered, and with that, will not be executed on retries.|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| filters | []object | A list of [Fluent Bit filters](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/filters) to apply to the logs processed by the pipeline. Filters are executed in sequence, as defined. They are executed before logs are buffered, and with that, are not executed on retries.|
```

| filters[].custom | string | The actual filter definition in the syntax of Fluent Bit.|

> | output | object | A [Fluent Bit outputs](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/outputs).|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| output | object | [Fluent Bit outputs](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/outputs).|
```

| output.custom | string | The actual output definition in the syntax of Fluent Bit.|
| variables | []object | A list of mappings from Kubernetes Secret keys to environment variables. Mapped keys are mounted as environment variables, so that they are available as [Variables](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/administration/configuring-fluent-bit/classic-mode/variables) in the sections.|
| variables[].name | string | Name of the variable to map. |

> | variables[].valueFrom.secretKeyRef | object | Reference to a key in a secret. `name` and `namespace` of the Secret, as well as the name of the `key`, must be provided |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| variables[].valueFrom.secretKeyRef | object | Reference to a key in Secret. `name` and `namespace` of the Secret, as well as the name of the `key`, must be provided |
```

| files[].name | string | The file name under which the snippet is mounted. The resulting path will be `/files/<name>`. |
| files[].content | string | The actual text snippet to mount as file.|

### LogPipeline.status attribute

For details, see the [LogPipeline specification file](https://github.com/kyma-project/kyma/blob/main/components/telemetry-operator/apis/telemetry/v1alpha1/logpipeline_types.go).

| Parameter | Type | Description |
|-|-|-|
| conditions | []object | An array of conditions describing the status of the pipeline.
| conditions[].lastTransitionTime | []object | An array of conditions describing the status of the pipeline.
| conditions[].reason | []object | An array of conditions describing the status of the pipeline.
| conditions[].type | enum | The possible transition types are:<br>- Running: The instance is ready and usable.<br>- Pending: The pipeline is being activated. |

### LogParser.spec attribute

For details, see the [LogParser specification file](https://github.com/kyma-project/kyma/blob/main/components/telemetry-operator/apis/telemetry/v1alpha1/logparser_types.go).

| Parameter | Type | Description |
|-|-|-|

> | parser | object | A [Fluent Bit Parsers](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/parsers). The parser specified here has no effect until it is referenced by a [Pod annotation](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/filters/kubernetes#kubernetes-annotations) on your workload or by a [Parser Filter](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/filters/parser) defined in a pipelines filters section. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| parser | object | [Fluent Bit Parsers](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/parsers). The parser specified here has no effect until it is referenced by a [Pod annotation](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/filters/kubernetes#kubernetes-annotations) on your workload or by a [Parser Filter](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/filters/parser) defined in a pipelines filters section. |
```

| parser.content | string | The actual parser definition in the syntax of Fluent Bit. |

### LogParser.status attribute

For details, see the [LogParser specification file](https://github.com/kyma-project/kyma/blob/main/components/telemetry-operator/apis/telemetry/v1alpha1/logparser_types.go).

| Parameter | Type | Description |
|-|-|-|
| conditions | []object | An array of conditions describing the status of the parser.
| conditions[].lastTransitionTime | []object | An array of conditions describing the status of the parser.
| conditions[].reason | []object | An array of conditions describing the status of the parser.
| conditions[].type | enum | The possible transition types are:<br>- Running: The parser is ready and usable.<br>- Pending: The parser is being activated. |

## Log record processing

> After a log record has been read, it is preprocessed by some central configuration sections like the `kubernetes` filter. Thus, when a record is ready to be processed by the sections defined in the LogPipeline definition, it will have several attributes available for processing and shipment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After a log record has been read, it is preprocessed by central configuration sections, like the `kubernetes` filter. Thus, when a record is ready to be processed by the sections defined in the LogPipeline definition, it has several attributes available for processing and shipment.
```

![Flow](./assets/telemetry-logging-flow.drawio.svg)

Learn more about these attributes in the following sections.

### Container log message

In the example, we assume there's a container `myContainer` of Pod `myPod` running in Namespace `myNamespace` logging to `stdout` with the following log message in JSON format:

```json
{
  "level": "warn",
  "message": "This is the actual message",
  "tenant": "myTenant",
  "traceID": "123"
}
```

### Tail input

The central pipeline tails the log message from a log file managed by the container runtime. The file name contains the Namespace, Pod, and container information that will be available later as part of the [tag](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/concepts/key-concepts#tag). The resulting log record available in an internal Fluent Bit representation looks similar to the following example:

```json
{
  "time": "2022-05-23T15:04:52.193317532Z",
  "stream": "stdout",
  "_p": "F",
  "log": "{\"level\": \"warn\",\"message\": \"This is the actual message\",\"tenant\": \"myTenant\",\"traceID\": \"123\"}
}
```

The attributes in the example have the following meaning:

| Attribute | Description |
|-|-|

> | time | The timestamp generated by the container runtime at the moment the log was written to the log file |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| time | The timestamp generated by the container runtime at the moment the log was written to the log file. |
```

> | stream | The stream to which the application wrote the log, either `stdout` or `stderr` |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| stream | The stream to which the application wrote the log, either `stdout` or `stderr`. |
```

> | _p | Indicates if the log message is partial (`P`) or final (`F`). Optional, dependent on container runtime. Because a CRI multiline parser is applied for the tailing phase, all multi-lines on container runtime level are aggregated already and no partial entries should be left. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| _p | Indicates if the log message is partial (`P`) or final (`F`). Optional, dependent on container runtime. Because a CRI multiline parser is applied for the tailing phase, all multilines on the container runtime level are aggregated already and no partial entries must be left. |
```

> | log | The raw and unparsed log message |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| log | The raw and unparsed log message. |
```

### Kubernetes filter (metadata)

In the next stage, the [Kubernetes filter](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/filters/kubernetes) is applied. The container information from the log file name (available in the tag) is interpreted and used for a Kubernetes API Server request to resolve more metadata of the container. All the resolved metadata enrich the existing record as a new attribute `kubernetes`:

```json
{
  "kubernetes":
  {
      "pod_name": "myPod-74db47d99-ppnsw",
      "namespace_name": "myNamespace",
      "pod_id": "88dbd1ef-d977-4636-804d-ef220454be1c",
      "host": "myHost1",
      "container_name": "myContainer",
      "docker_id": "5649c36fcc1e956fc95e3145441f427d05d6e514fa439f4e4f1ccee80fb2c037",
      "container_hash": "myImage@sha256:1f8d852989c16345d0e81a7bb49da231ade6b99d51b95c56702d04c417549b26",
      "container_image": "myImage:myImageTag",
      "labels":
      {
          "app": "myApp",
          ...
      },
      "annotations":
      {
          "sidecar.istio.io/inject"=>"true",
          ...
      }
  }
}
```

### Kubernetes filter (JSON parser)

> After the enrichment of the log record with the Kubernetes-relevant metadata, the [Kubernetes filter](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/filters/kubernetes) also tries to parse the record as a JSON document. If that was successful, all the parsed root attributes of the parsed document are added as new individual root attributes of the log.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After the enrichment of the log record with the Kubernetes-relevant metadata, the [Kubernetes filter](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/filters/kubernetes) also tries to parse the record as a JSON document. If that is successful, all the parsed root attributes of the parsed document are added as new individual root attributes of the log.
```

Record **before** applying the JSON parser:

```json
{
  "time": "2022-05-23T15:04:52.193317532Z",
  "stream": "stdout",
  "_p": "F",
  "log": "{\"level\": \"warn\",\"message\": \"This is the actual message\",\"tenant\": \"myTenant\",\"traceID\": \"123\"}",
  "kubernetes": {...}
}
```

Record **after** applying the JSON parser:

```json
{
  "time": "2022-05-23T15:04:52.193317532Z",
  "stream": "stdout",
  "_p": "F",
  "log": "{\"level\": \"warn\",\"message\": \"This is the actual message\",\"tenant\": \"myTenant\",\"traceID\": \"123\"}",
  "kubernetes": {...},
  "level": "warn",
  "message": "This is the actual message",
  "tenant": "myTenant",
  "traceID": "123"
}
```

### Rewrite tag

> As per `LogPipeline` definition, a dedicated [rewrite_tag](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/filters/rewrite-tag) filter is introduced. The filter brings a dedicated filesystem buffer for the outputs defined in the related pipeline, and with that, ensures a shipment of the logs isolated from outputs of other pipelines. As a consequence, each pipeline runs on its own [tag](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/concepts/key-concepts#tag).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As per LogPipeline definition, a dedicated [rewrite_tag](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/filters/rewrite-tag) filter is introduced. The filter brings a dedicated filesystem buffer for the outputs defined in the related pipeline, and with that, ensures a shipment of the logs isolated from outputs of other pipelines. As a consequence, each pipeline runs on its own [tag](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/concepts/key-concepts#tag).
```
I'm not sure if we need the brackets here.

![Pipeline Concept](./assets/telemetry-logging-pipelines.drawio.svg)

As outlined in above diagram, the application logs are getting read by a central `tail` input plugin and enriched by a `kubernetes` filter. Then, a `rewrite_tag` filter will be generated for every `LogPipeline` definition having a dedicated tag followed by the custom configuration defined in the `LogPipeline` resource. That approach will assure a managed buffer management and isolation of pipelines while keeping flexibility on customizations.

### Telemetry Operator

The `LogPipeline` resource is managed by the `Telemetry Operator`, a typical kubernetes operator responsible for managing the custom parts of the Fluent Bit configuration.

![Operator resources](./assets/telemetry-operator-resources.drawio.svg)

> It will watch all LogPiepline resources and related secrets. When ever the configuration changes, it will validate the configuration (via a ValidatingWebhook) and then generate a new configuration for the Fluent Bit Daemonset. Here, several ConfigMaps for the different aspects of the configuration are getting generated. Furthermore, referenced secrets are getting copied into one secret being mounted to the DaemonSet as well.

Author: Piepline hihi ^^

![Pipeline Concept](./assets/telemetry-logging-pipelines.drawio.svg)

> As outlined in the diagram, the application logs are read by a central `tail` input plugin and enriched by a `kubernetes` filter. Then, a `rewrite_tag` filter is generated for every `LogPipeline` definition having a dedicated `tag` with name `<logpipeline>.*` followed by the custom configuration defined in the `LogPipeline` resource. That approach assures a managed buffer management and isolation of pipelines, while keeping flexibility on customizations.

Reviewer: Then, for every `LogPipeline` definition a `rewrite_tag` filter is generated which is using a dedicated `tag` with name `<logpipeline>.*`, followed by the custom configuration defined in the `LogPipeline` resource.

> As outlined in the diagram, the application logs are read by a central `tail` input plugin and enriched by a `kubernetes` filter. Then, a `rewrite_tag` filter is generated for every `LogPipeline` definition having a dedicated `tag` with name `<logpipeline>.*` followed by the custom configuration defined in the `LogPipeline` resource. That approach assures a managed buffer management and isolation of pipelines, while keeping flexibility on customizations.

Author: ```suggestion
First, the application logs are read by a central `tail` input plugin and enriched by a `kubernetes` filter. 

Then, for every `LogPipeline` definition, a `rewrite_tag` filter is generated, which uses a dedicated `tag` with name `<logpipeline>.*`, followed by the custom configuration defined in the `LogPipeline` resource.

This approach assures a managed buffer management and isolation of pipelines, while keeping flexibility on customizations.
```

> As outlined in the diagram, the application logs are read by a central `tail` input plugin and enriched by a `kubernetes` filter. Then, a `rewrite_tag` filter is generated for every `LogPipeline` definition having a dedicated `tag` with name `<logpipeline>.*` followed by the custom configuration defined in the `LogPipeline` resource. That approach assures a managed buffer management and isolation of pipelines, while keeping flexibility on customizations.

Author: applied this suggestion

The `Telemetry Operator` watches all Log Pipeline resources and related secrets. Whenever the configuration changes, it validates the configuration (with a Validating Webhook) and generates a new configuration for the Fluent Bit Daemon Set, where several Config Maps for the different aspects of the configuration are generated. Furthermore, referenced secrets are copied into one secret that is mounted to the Daemon Set as well.

> ## LogPipeline Usage

Reviewer: It is trying to outline the feature set on base of use cases. It is not about the tutorial steps itself. I think it will be bad to explain the feature set each in individual documents. Also jumping all the time feels disturbing to me

2. The second filter is dropping all log records fullfiling the given rule. Here, typical namespaces are getting dropped based on the `kubernetes`attribute explained in more detail here XX.
3. A record gets modifed by adding a new attribute. Here, a constant attribute gets added to every log record for recording the actual cluster node name at the record for later filtering in the backend system. As value a placeholder gets used refering to a kubernetes specific environment variable.

**Step 3: Add authentication details from secrets**
- Integrations into external system always require authentication details dealing with sensitive data. To handle that data properly in secrets, the `LogPipeline` supports the reference of secrets. The key/value entries of the secrets will be injected as environment variables to the Fluent Bit Pods and with that will be available for usage in [placeholder expressions](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/administration/configuring-fluent-bit/classic-mode/variables)

> 

Reviewer: fixed

| | | content | string | An actual multilineParser definition in the syntax of Fluent Bit |
| | | ref | A reference to a built-in parser which will get activated
|**status** | | | | Holds relevant information about the status of the pipeline, not modifiable |
| | conditions | | []object | An array of conditions describing the status of the pipeline.
| | | lastTransitionTime | []object | An array of conditions describing the status of the pipeline.
| | | reason | []object | An array of conditions describing the status of the pipeline.
| | | type | enum | The possible transition types are:<br>- Running: the instance is ready and usable<br>- Pending: the pipeline get activated currently |

## Log Record Processing

When a log record got read it will be pre-processed by some central configuration sections like the `kubernetes` filter. So when a record is ready to be processed by the sections defined in the LogPipeline definition, it will have several attributes available for processing and shipment. These will be discussed in more detail in the following following the flow outlined in the diagram.

> ![Flow](./assets/telemetry-logging-flow.drawio.svg)

Reviewer: Both are way to blue in the background for my taste :)

> ![Flow](./assets/telemetry-logging-flow.drawio.svg)

Reviewer: Much better

```json
{
  "kubernetes":
  {
      "pod_name": "myPod-74db47d99-ppnsw",
      "namespace_name": "myNamespace",
      "pod_id": "88dbd1ef-d977-4636-804d-ef220454be1c",
      "host": "myHost1",
      "container_name": "myContainer",
      "docker_id": "5649c36fcc1e956fc95e3145441f427d05d6e514fa439f4e4f1ccee80fb2c037",
      "container_hash": "myImage@sha256:1f8d852989c16345d0e81a7bb49da231ade6b99d51b95c56702d04c417549b26",
      "container_image": "myImage:myImageTag",
      "labels":
      {
          "app": "myApp",
          ...
      },
      "annotations":
      {
          "sidecar.istio.io/inject"=>"true",
          ...
      }
  }
}
```

### Kubernetes Filter (JSON parser)

After the enrichment of the log record with the kubernetes relevant metadata, the [Kubernetes filter](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/filters/kubernetes) also tries to parse the record as a JSON document. If that was successful, all the parsed root attributes of the parsed document will be added as new individual root attributes of the log.

> Following that, the current record:

Author: ```suggestion
Record **before** applying the JSON parser:
```

```json
{
  "time": "2022-05-23T15:04:52.193317532Z",
  "stream": "stdout",
  "_p": "F",
  "log": "{\"level\": \"warn\",\"message\": \"This is the actual message\",\"tenant\": \"myTenant\",\"traceID\": \"123\"}",
  "kubernetes": {...}
}
```

> becomes this record:

Author: ```suggestion
Record **after** applying the JSON parser:```

```json
{
  "time": "2022-05-23T15:04:52.193317532Z",
  "stream": "stdout",
  "_p": "F",
  "log": "{\"level\": \"warn\",\"message\": \"This is the actual message\",\"tenant\": \"myTenant\",\"traceID\": \"123\"}",
  "kubernetes": {...},
  "level": "warn",
  "message": "This is the actual message",
  "tenant": "myTenant",
  "traceID": "123"
}
```

### Rewrite tag

> Per `LogPipeline` definition a dedicated [rewrite_tag](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/filters/rewrite-tag) filter is introduced. That will bring a dedicated filesystem buffer for the outputs defined in the related pipeline and with that will ensure a shipment of the logs isolated from outputs of other pipelines. As a consequence, each pipeline will run on it's [tag](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/concepts/key-concepts#tag). The tag has a unique prefix and a suffix containing the log file name (from where you can derive the pod details).

Author: ```suggestion
As per `LogPipeline` definition, a dedicated [rewrite_tag](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/filters/rewrite-tag) filter is introduced. The filter brings a dedicated filesystem buffer for the outputs defined in the related pipeline, and with that, ensures a shipment of the logs isolated from outputs of other pipelines. As a consequence, each pipeline runs on its [tag](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/concepts/key-concepts#tag). The tag has a unique prefix and a suffix containing the log file name (from where you can derive the pod details).
```

> The tag which gets generated for a pipeline has the following format:

Author: ```suggestion
The tag is generated for a pipeline with the following format:
```

```

> <piepeline_name>.kube.var.log.containers.<pod_name>_<namespace_name>_<container_name>-<container_id>.log

Author: Piep again?

```suggestion
<pipeline_name>.kube.var.log.containers.<pod_name>_<namespace_name>_<container_name>-<container_id>.log
```

```

> Following that, you can define [Match](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/concepts/key-concepts#match) expressions in your filter or output definition for specific namespaces/pods/containers only like for example:

Author: ```suggestion
After creation of the tag, you can define [Match](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/concepts/key-concepts#match) expressions in your filter or output definition for specific Namespaces, Pods, and containers only.
For example, to match only logs based on the Namespace `default`, use the following expression:
```

```
Match    <myPipeline>.*_default_*
```

> to match only logs based on the namespace `default`

Author: ```suggestion
```

## Limitations

### Supported Fluent Bit Plugins

> - The list of supported filters are:

Author: ```suggestion
Supported filters:
```

  - [CheckList](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/filters/checklist)
  - [Grep](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/filters/grep)
  - [Parser](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/filters/parser)
  - [Record Modifier](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/filters/record-modifier)
  - [Modify](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/filters/modify)
  - [Nest](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/filters/nest)

> - The list of supported outputs are:

Author: ```suggestion
Supported outputs:
```

  - [HTTP](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/outputs/http)
  - [Loki](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/outputs/loki)
  - [Forward](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/outputs/forward)
- You can enable the usage of other standard plugins coming with Fluent Bit by explicitly enabling the `communityMode`, which will not be covered by any support from the kyma team.

> - Following plugins can not be enabled as they potentially will harm the stability:

Author: ```suggestion
You cannot enable the following plugins, because they potentially harm the stability:
```
